dr livier martinez is here to supervise the training sessions 

she comes from 23 years in the social work field 
rape crsis, adoptions, child care cases 

she has built a large mental health program in the largest CC in the state 

she has incredible and relevant and experience 

for any admin or logistical questions we can answer them via email 

For today we will have Tamar lead the mindfulness but starting next week 

Mindfulness scripts and mindfulness ideas for zoom 

active listening is the first topic 

we want to practice active listening because it is different than what we normally do in our personal lives 
it is not the most natural way to move about the world 

Common Roadblocks to active listening 

1. ordering directing or commanding 
2. warning cautioning or threatening
3. persuading with logic arguing or lecturing 
4. Telling people what they should do moralizing or preaching
5. disagreeing judging criticizing or blaming 
6. agreeing approving or praising 
7. Shaming ridiculing or labeling 
8. Interpreting or analyzing 
9. Reassauring, sympathizing or consoling 
10. questioning or probing 
11. withdrawing distracting humoring or changing the subject 

why shouldnt we give advice ?

they wont learn in the same way 
they wont be able to consolidate the information
you want to help people build insight 

what are my roadblocks ?
all of these are normal and expected 

Motivational Interviewing 

we want to use it with participants that are conflicted with a decision
why they want to change 
if they want to change 
the goal is to help them understand where they are at 

sometimes making changes is really hard 
they may not want to make the change 

your job is to help them gain insight on whether or not they want to make a change 
how 
soft approach of whether they want to make a change or not 

OARS techniques

Open questioning 
-gives the person space to choose how they want to respond 
-what might it be like to start exercising ?

Affirming 
-focusing on strengths and reinforcements on positive changing 
-it is great and positive that you want to make an effort to improve your health
-and i hear that that is something that you want to do which is great 

Reflecting 
- offers a short summary about what the individual has said 

Summarizing 
- collect,link, or transition the comments understanding and moving the conversation forward 

Want to avoid asking multiple questions in a row 
want to mix up all four of these skills together when we do motivational interviewing 

Change or no change pros and cons 
our first impulse might be to focus on the pros of the change they might want to make 

OUR focus should be whether they want to make that change but walk them through the pros and cons of each 
is this something I should do or not 
ask open ended questions about helping people change if they want to 

positive activities
reliving positive experiences 
(squeezing the last juice out of that orange)
it can really be any positive experience , just a positive experience it can be anything small it doesnt have to be a big milestone 

I like the idea of adding activities into my schedule 
but im feeling overwhelmed by the thought of doing so many new activities
i think this might not be the program for me 

can be overwhelming 
might want to validate if they are anxious
discouraged
worried if they dont have enough time to give 100 percent to the program
some doubt or uncertainty

i can see why you might be feeling anxious about this 
its ok to make guesses sometimes 

you have to be ok with being corrected in case you are wrong 

validate

1. authentic
2. nonverbal skills
3. open ended questions
4. reflecting emotions
5. content summaries
6. avoid advice giving 

what are some other things that are preventing you?

we can go through the pros and cons in an informal way

what might be the good things about this program 

we just want them to figure out if they want to make the change 

validating
reinforcing 
and motivational interviewing 

breakout rooms
partner up 
1 person 

we can rate how hard it is to do the activities 
maybe all of the things they planned to do are not super feasible so they can make some modifications 

they can use the smart planning sheets to break it down into smaller specific goals 

want to do some scaffolding 
it sounds like what you are feeling is having overwhelmed 
im wondering if there is anything from the module can help you with this kind of thing 

they are not remember anything from the module 
what if we look at the tools from the modules together 
